 
Ausperghaus Catalog and Auction Preview

This catalog represents the full public listing of lots available at the Ausperghaus esoterica auction. This particular auction is by invitation only due to the esoteric and occult nature of the items. Invitations were sent to several old and valued clients of Ausperghaus and assorted antiquitarian collectors, booksellers and members of the Viennese occult community.   

Auction Preview: Wednesday, August 9, 1922 (11:00 – 16:00) 
Auction: Saturday, August 12, 1922 (21:00) 
 
History of Ausperghaus Auctions 
 
Ausperghaus of Vienna was established in 1847 and is currently run by Frederick Albert Ausperg, who will be the live auctioneer. Ausperg is 5-years old and an example of a perfect Austrian gentleman. He is elegantly mannered and speaks English with a cultured British accent. Frederick Albert Ausperg has no interest in the occult other than to provide a good sale for his old and valued clients. 

Frederick Albert Ausperg hired Elena Pavlova out of university upon the recommendation of Prof. Dr. Horvath. There are a few small apartments on the top floor of the auction house building for employees.     
 
Conditions of Sale 
 
1.	The highest Bidder to be the Buyer; and, if any dispute arises between two or more Bidders, the Lot so in dispute shall be immediately put up again and re-sold. 
2.	The Purchasers to give their names and forwarding addresses, and to pay down twenty-five per cent on the dollar in part payment, or the whole of the Purchase-money if required; in default of which the Lot or Lots so purchased to be immediately put up again and re-sold. 
3.	The Lots to be taken away at the Buyer's Expense and Risk within three days from the conclusion of the Sale, and the remainder of the Purchase-money to be absolutely paid, or otherwise settled for to the satisfaction of the Vendors, on or before delivery; in default of which, Ausperghaus will not hold itself responsible, if the Lots to be lost, stolen, damaged, or destroyed by any means (including Magickal) but they will be left at the sole risk of the Purchaser. 
4.	The sale of any article is not to be set aside on account of any error in the description. All articles are exposed for Private Exhibition one or more days, and are sold just as they are without recourse. 
5.	To prevent inaccuracy in delivery and inconvenience in the settlement of the Purchases, no Lot can, on any account, be removed, by any means, during the sale. 
6.	Upon failure of complying with the above conditions, the money deposited in part payment shall be forfeited; all Lots un-cleared within the time aforesaid shall be re-sold by Public or Private sale, and the deficiency attending such re-sale shall be made good by the Defaulter at this Sale, together with all charges attending the same. This Condition is without prejudice to the right of the Auctioneers to enforce the contract made at this Sale, without such re-sale if they think fit. 
7.	Persons who cannot attend the sale, may have their commissions faithfully executed by their obedient servants. 
 
Currency: 
 
£1 = $4.50
£1 = 300 – 400 Schilling
$1 = 100 – 200 Schilling  
 

Description of Lots 
  
Lot #	Title / Description	Catalog Notes	Elena Pavlova's Professional Assessment
1	Ankh. Egyptian — circ a 550 B.C. 	Height: 23 cm (9"); Width: 10 cm (4") across with arms. Composed of an alloy of copper and silver bearing untranslated hieratic markings about the front. Known as the "Blood Ankh." Minimum bid £100. 	This item was first known to be in the possession of Theosophus Magnus, a 14 Century sorcerer who reportedly used this item as an adjunct to summon demons. It was lost when he was burned at the stake in 1371. It is next recorded in the hands of Lady Maria Spendoza of Madrid in 1587. She is said to have murdered children and bathed the ankh in their blood to give it supernatural qualities, whence comes its common appellation, the "Blood Ankh." In Inquisition records, the ankh was confiscated when Dona Maria was apprehended in 1595 and committed suicide in prison. Since that time, the ankh has rested in the successive hands of several private collectors.  
2	Manuscript of Beth Eloim  — circa 1580	In Hebrew. Pages are illuminated with gold leaf. Leather binding. Octavo. ✠ 62 marked on spine. 426 pages. Minimum bid £60.	The manuscript is from the Lost Library of the Tsars and was consigned to the auction house via a Russian contact of Elena Pavlova's who works at the Handelskai. The manuscript is an esoteric, though unremarkable, cabalistic treatise on angles, demons and the soul of man, how and why they exist and what relationship they have to each other. Given the estimated date of manuscript (1580), it was added to the library around 150 years after the library was established, possibly as part of a donation of manuscripts by Johannes Wetterman to gain access to the library during his visit to Moscow in 1598/99.   
3	Multiple Lot 	Magician's Cassock - Embroidered with various signs of ceremonial magic; Hickory Wand carved with astrological signs; Athame - 31 cm (12") long, double-edged. £40.	The three items are scorched as if exposed to extreme heat. Each is basic to a modern performance of ceremonial magic. An Athame is a dagger used in ceremonial magic. The items are beautifully made and are not stage props.  
4	Hand of Glory — U.S.A. circa 1900	The preserved left hand of a human. Marked overall with mystic designs. Each finger supports a candle reportedly made of rendered human fat. 	The Hand of Glory has been a staple of black magic for centuries. A preserved human hand (ideally from a hanged criminal) is surmounted with five candles, one on each finger. Each candle is made from fat rendered from the body of a murderer. Reputedly, when the proper spells are performed, the candle flames will point the way to treasure. The hand also could be used in summoning the dead. Finally, when taken into a household, the residents will fall asleep, and the hand's wielder can rob the building. 
5	Multiple Lot 	African fetish, circa 1800, of teak wood and hair. About 18 cm (7") tall, in the style of the Hausi tribe of western Africa; African Drum, circa 1800, of teak wood and skin, irregularly shaped, 41 cm (16") tall. Both bear the sign of the same artisan. Minimum bid £30. 	Both items were brought back from Africa back Winston Rhys-Smith, a well-known English explorer who recently passed away. Both drum and fetish were made by a witch-doctor of the Hausi. 
6	Book: The Magus	By Francis Barret; First edition. 1801. Lackington, Allen & Co., Publishers. Minimum bid £30. 	This book helped to start the occult renaissance of the 19 Century. Francis Barret was considered a learned man by some and a fraud by others. His book has become a mainstay of modern occultism, and deals with alchemy, astrology, ceremonial magic, and demonology. A first edition copy of this book would be considered a collector's item. 
7	Sword - circa 1350	German, circa 1350. First belonging to the alchemist and sorcerer Paracelsus. 108 cm (42") long, with a crystal pommel engraved with the word "AZOTH." Minimum bid £250	Paracelsus was a German philosopher and alchemist renowned for his wide knowledge. Supposedly he summoned a demon and had it imprisoned within the hilt of his sword, to do his bidding. Modern occultists and students of alchemy believe that Azoth, the name engraved on the hilt, stands for the vital alchemical principle which makes life possible, not for the name of a demon.  
8	Human Skull 	Circa 1500. Used during black masses. Top of skull removed and interior inlaid with silver to form cup. Rim surrounded by 13 garnets. Minimum bid £100.	Human skulls were frequently used in black masses during the Middle Ages. This one is particularly ornate; perhaps belonging to a nobleman or was constructed for a specific purpose, such as the consecration of a new coven leader.  
9	Riveted Brass Head	Germany, circa 13 Century. Artisan unknown. Similar to the "Philosopher's Head." Minimum bid £130.	This item is purported to have been constructed by a black magician in the image of Roger Bacon. It is said to have the ability to answer questions dealing with metaphysics and deep philosophy. An unknown ceremony evoked it.  
10	I-Ching Sticks 	China. Second Ming dynasty. Carved ivory. Six sticks used to cast the I-Ching, each 15.5 cm (6") long and 40 mm (1/4") square. Minimum bid £70.	 An old collectible. 
11	Book: Liber AL vel Legis	By Alistair Crowley. Published in 1904 by A*A*.  Minimum bid £10.	Aleister Crowley, born 1875, is an occultist and practitioner of his own style of black magic. He started a small cult or group of Satanists; he likes to be known as "The Beast." His first book, The Book of the Law, laid down his principles for life and the basic tenets of his philosophy of magic. A first edition is a collector's item. 
12	Book: Prodigies in the New-England Canaan	Colonial America circa 18 Century. Author Rev. Ward Phillips. Minimum bid £55.	An exceedingly rare pamphlet depicting attacks by the Devil on a particular area of New England. Much in the vein of Cotton Mather's Wonders of the Invisible World, but Rev. Phillips' tales have a ring of truth, and the events as described give a more ominous meaning. 
13	Multiple Lot	Four medallions: two gold, one copper, one tin. France circa 1600. Protective signs to be worn by a sorcerer during magical operations. Minimum bid £45.	Many protective signs and charms were used by sorcerers during the Renaissance, each designed to protect its wearer from evil influences or to give the wearer certain abilities or powers. 
14	Book: Dictionnaire Infernal	By Jacques Collin. France. Published 1863 by Pion. Minimum bid £18.	This book lists and describes the major devils of Hell. 
15	Shaman Medicine Bag	Eskimo. Modern. Leather. Minimum bid £5.	An eskimo shaman gathers certain items as directed by his spirit guide. The items together weigh only a few ounces. These items, when sealed into the bag by a special ceremony, becomes the heart of the shaman's power. It is supposed to be death to open and look into a shaman's medicine bag. The item is a curio.   
16	Gold Ring	Arabia. Circa 19 Century. A design of intertwined serpents surrounding a magical symbol evidently meant to be the Seal of Solomon. Minimum bid £35.	The Seal of Solomon is a magical symbol which King Solomon, in Judaic and Arabic legend, is said to have used to command and imprison demons. Absolute authenticity is, of course, impossible.  
 
 

